## Lessons From Early Stage Startups 11.18.2023

I have always enjoyed reading what others have learned through their experiences. Here are some loose thoughts on what is important during the first couple years of a startup.

- Over-invest in your core data model early on. This is the hardest thing to change after things have been built on top of it. In order to get this right, it is crucial that the space is understood as extensively as possible… Your business dictates your data model. This is really a chicken-or-the-egg exercise, since as an early-stage company you are flexing into the right product-market fit, however there are some things you can do to improve your future quality of life.
    - Modular modeling. For example, if you are doing an enterprise product and need management over a large number of independent “Things”, first and foremost work on making the individual “Thing” as encapsulated as possible. In the case of restaurants, have the core be the restaurant then extend to support restaurant group functionality
    - Keep schemas simple. A wide table is much easier to update and maintain than a complex star scheme
    - Avoid unstructured data and don’t shy away from making use complex data types that modern SQL supports. The database is probably going to be the most powerful piece of technology in your entire stack and you didn’t even have to write it.
- The most important development practices to adopt:
    - Low-level modules that wrap third party APIs. In Python, I have made use of an ABC and declarative utility classes. Allows for easy versioning updates, composability and organization.
    - Type systems are really good, make heavy use of them so your IDE can do the work
    - Documentation is as important as the actual code. Things change quickly, so make sure it’s all up to date as well
    - Reduce the number of technologies you use. Don’t use specialized languages for different functions in your application code. Don’t roll your own database, container orchestration, or web framework. Other people do it better
    - Refactor early and often. You will rebuild your product at least three times, so make it easier for yourself each time.
    - Aggressively prune code. It is surprisingly easy to write code and forget about things you just wrote. If you have millions of LOC in your first few years, you are doing something wrong.
    - When choosing tech, just pick what people know. Anyone can code in anything, and unless the product begs a specific feature (massive concurrency, high-performance), don’t spend too much time laboring on the decision. That said, don’t compromise on stability. As a startup, you cannot weather the risk of a critical dependency having issues.
    - Remove people from critical positions ASAP. This means; 
        - Aim to make deployments as simple as merging a commit. 
        - Have redundant knowledge over different topics in the problem domain. People should be able to take vacation without hindering development speed.
        - Make sure manual processes that require developer time are automated. A good example would be client configurations like typing, CTAs, images, labels, etc… Make a self-service solution so some developer doesn’t have to go into the database.
- One of the most important aspects of your job as an early stage developer is to push back on features. Limiting the number of features is the same as making sure you are building the right thing well. Differentiation at an early stage never happens because you out-feature a big player, it happens because certain aspects of your product are better . You need to be better at saying “no” than anyone else in the company.
- It is really really important to have real users as quick as possible. Having a pre-production product at a high-velocity development pace is a recipe for burnout. Interim milestones can help, but it is no substitute for real people.
- Have company-wide demo days. Not only does this do QA, but it aligns the developers with the business folk and creates a unified vision of what is being built.
- You can get by with flat organizations early on, in fact it is necessary. However, once junior employees come on, or the organization reaches a certain size, then it is important to have a clear chain of command and outlined responsibilities
- Tests are the single most important aspects of developing an early stage product. These are more important than “moving quickly.” (although they tend to have that effect) During pre-production development, automated unit and integration tests should be written for platform functions. Once a product-market fit happens, invest in QA processes, especially automated regression testing, for client facing applications.
- Culture is what defines the transition from a hacker group to a true business. Initially, culture is dictated by the work itself and the skin in the game. Your core group will define habits that will disseminate into the rest of the organization. It is important to be hypersensitive to toxicity at this point more than ever since it sets the precedence. No-questions-asked time off, giving a shit about our coworkers outside of work like they are your own blood, open and honest communication, focus on continued learning in all aspects of life, and glue for the in-between time. These are what you define and they never leave. Once the company reaches critical mass (15+ people), there will be a transition. It will suck. At this point, it is important to focus heavily on; what things, outside of work, make this company a company? These things are dual purpose, at this point the focus on culture also makes you *competitive* in the hiring market. Something you’ll need to absolutely have once you start scaling.
    - [Retirement policies? Is infinite time off really a good idea? How often do people see each other in person? What makes an employee’s quality of life improve when they are part of this company? Food? Medical? Dental?]
- When initially hiring, specialization is not a requirement. Network, commitment and personality are. When scaling, specialization is required, which is why culture is important. Usually people who have specialized/are specializing want stability and not do 5 jobs.
- The people you find early on are certifiably crazy and some of the smartest people you’ll ever meet. The risk, stress and stupidity of doing an early-stage startup can create these people. Understand that the lenses you view these people through will change as the company changes.
- Invest heavily in onboarding. The second person that get’s hired at the organization should be able to commit code their first or second day on the job. The quicker someone is autonomous, the quicker you can go back to focusing on shipping the product.
- A document-based culture is important in keeping from having the same conversations and drive actual conclusions. You will reference certain documents for years, so take care in their creation and organization. Ideally new employees shouldn’t ever be lost if they are asked to find something. Also. GET IMPORTANT CONVERSATIONS OUT OF SLACK.
- When dealing with external parties (integrations, customers, partners), at this point, you are your company. Out-nice them and remember you’re both trying to make a bit more money.
- Remote-only work is cool, some people really like it, but in order to move quickly, you need to be in person at least half the time. Lifestyle must align company wide.
